Near the end of the Bible are 21 letters written to communities of Jesus' followers
throughout the ancient roman empire. 

Letters? Like I am reading someone's mail?

Yeah, the letters are written by the apostles, that is the people that Jesus appointed 
to spread the good news about his kingdom, and they wrote to Jesus' followers living 
in different cities around the Roman world.

These letters were all written in a style called prose-discourse.

Now, if I am reading a letter that was not written to me,
then there is likely a lot of background information that is assumed but not mentioned.

Yeah, exactly! And the letters in the Bible are no different. 

Okay, So let us talk about how to read the New Testament letters in historical context.

So, there are three levels of historical context to keep in mind when reading the 
New Testament letters. 

The first is how all the letters fit into the larger storyline 
of the scriptures.

Right! So, this story begins with God creating Humanity as his partners to rule creation with him.
But, we choose to rule on our own terms leading to violence, exile and death.

But, God promises a guy named Abraham that life and blessing will spread to all nations 
through him and his descendants, to renew God's vision for humanity.

And, Jesus said he came to bring that promise to its fulfillment,
through his life, death and resurrection.

Right! And so, the apostles saw themselves as heralds.
Announcing the arrival of God's kingdom in Jesus.

Like the apostle Paul, when he wrote to the house churches in Rome about the good news.
He said his job was to summon people of all nations to give their allegiance to Jesus,
the exalted king of the world.

That is a bold thing to say to people living in the capital city of the Roman Empire,
whose allegiance is supposed to be the Caesar.

Yeah! And, that actually brings us to the second important context
for understanding the New Testament letters.
The culture of the Roman Empire in the first century.

So, Rome ruled all of these territories around the Mediterranean Sea,
and they wrote their empire by conquering and enslaved their enemies
and then imposing heavy taxes.

The Emperor and his small circle
controlled all of the power and wealth.
And they knew how to deal with people who threatened the social order.

Most people lived without much money or stability. 

In Roman culture had a very clear hierarchy
Men from important families with money and education could move ahead in society.
But, women, slaves, children and the poor were always at a disadvantage

and treated as inferior. Yet, in a community of people who followed Jesus
everyone was treated with love and
equal dignity.

Yeah! in roman life it was unheard of for people of high status
to associate with people below them.
But, the apostle said that through Jesus, God had given the gift of his love to 
everyone without regard to their status.

So, in that context these letters were
counter-cultural and they broke down barriers between people.

Exactly!
And so, that brings us to the last level of
context the situational context of each letter. 

You mean the specific
issues in the church of a city that prompted the writing of the letter in the first place.

Yeah, like Paul's letter to the Christians in Rome.
It is tempting to read this letter and focus on all the important theology
and then overlook why he wrote this letter.

Why did he write it? Well, 

towards the end he talks about how Jewish food laws and sacred days
have become controversial between Jewish and non-jewish
followers of Jesus. 

Which was creating divisions in the church.

And, if you read carefully you can see that some christians with higher social status
were treating Jewish followers of Jesus with contempt. 

And, Jewish Christians were returning favor
condemning the non-jews as second-rate followers of Jesus.

Exactly! And, so all of the ideas and theology in the first part of the letter
were crafted to address those very problems.

Paul acknowledges that the Roman Christians have big differences in culture, 
theology and social status.
But, he wants them to realize that they are unified by their faith in Jesus,
who is the real center of their church.

Okay, great! But, if that letter was written to someone else
then, what should I get out of it? I mean I do not live in ancient rome.

Well in these letters we see the apostles
challenging and transforming every part of their first century culture and life
with the good news about King Jesus and by watching them,
we gain wisdom about how that same good news can transform our culture as well.

Now, there is one more helpful step to take in reading the New Testament letters
and that is learning how to follow the flow of thought from the letters beginning
all the way to its end. That is what we will look at next.

