The book of Acts.

It's the second volume of a unified two-part 
work that today we call: Luke' Acts.

These were written by the same author, 
Luke, who was the traveling co-worker with Paul.

This is clear from the book's introduction,
where Luke says, "I produced my first volume,
that's the gospel, about all the things
that Jesus began to do and teach."

Now Luke's giving a clue here as to what
this book of Acts will be about.

Volume 1 was about what Jesus began to do and teach,
volume 2 will then be about what Jesus
continued to do and teach, which leads to
a really interesting point about the
book's traditional, but not original, name:

the Acts of the Apostles.
While different apostles do appear in
most of these stories, the only single character
who unifies the whole story from beginning to end
is Jesus himself, acting directly or through the Spirit.

And so, the book would more accurately be named
the Acts of Jesus and the Spirit.

The book's introduction recounts how
the risen Jesus spend some 40 days with the disciples,
teaching them about the kingdom of God.

This connects back to the story of Luke's gospel,
where Jesus claimed that He was restoring
God's kingdom over the world, beginning with Israel.

So He called Israel to live under God's reign by following Him,
and He was enthroned as king when He gave up His life,
and then conquered death with His love.

And so, the book of Acts begins with
the risen King Jesus instructing His
disciples about life in His kingdom.

So He promises that the Spirit 
will soon come and immerse them in 
His personal presence, and this fulfills 
one of the key hopes from the Old Testament prophets:

that in the Messianic Kingdom, God's presence, His Spirit, would come
and take up residence among His people in a new temple, and transform their hearts.

And so, Jesus says, when this happens,
the Spirit will empower his disciples to be
"My witnesses in Jerusalem, Judea, and
Samaria, and to the ends of the earth."

From here, Jesus is taken up from their sight, and a cloud, it's an image drawn from the book of Daniel chapter 7, it shows how Jesus is now being enthroned
as the son of man, who was vindicated after His suffering
and now shares in God's rule over the world.

And so, He promises that He will return one day.

And so, the main themes and the design of the book of Acts flow right out of this opening chapter.

This is a story about Jesus leading His people by the Spirit to go out into the world, and invite all nations to live under His reign,

and so, the story will begin with that message
spreading in Jerusalem, and then into the
neighboring regions of Judea and Samaria,

full of non-Jewish people, and then from there,
out to all of the nations into the ends of the earth.

This video is just going to focus on the first half of the book,
so Jerusalem focus section begins with Jesus' followers waiting until the feast of Pentecost,

when all of these Jewish pilgrims from all over the ancient world were in the city,

and the Holy Spirit comes on the disciples as a great wind,
and something like flames appear over each person's head,
and together they start announcing and telling stories of God's mighty deeds,
and they're speaking in all of these languages that they didn't know before,
but all the people gathered there understand perfectly.

Now, in order to see what Luke's emphasizing in this story,
it is crucial to see the Old Testament roots of all of these images.

So first, the wind and the fire is a direct allusion
to the stories about God's glorious fiery presence,
filling the tabernacle and the temple.

And it's also connected to the prophetic promises
that God would come and live by His Spirit
in the new temple of the Messianic Kingdom.

And so here in Acts, God's fiery presence comes to dwell,
not in a building, but in His people.

Luke is saying that the new temple promised by the prophets,
is Jesus' new covenant family, the people of Jesus,
which connects to the second thing Luke is trying to say here.

So, the prophets promise that when God came to dwell
in His new temple, He would reunify all the
tribes of Israel under the Messianic King
and that the good news of God's reign
would go out and be announced to the nations.

Luke describes in detail the international, multi-tribe makeup of
all of the Israelites who were there at Pentecost and who responded to Peter's message.

And so the Apostles keep calling Israelites to acknowledge Jesus as their Messiah,
and thousands upon thousands respond,
forming new communities of generosity and
worship and celebration, but not everybody's celebrating.

From here, Luke shows how Jesus' new family quickly
faced hostility from the Jerusalem leaders.

With a really beautiful symmetrical design,
Luke tells a tale of two temples.

So God's new temple, the community of Jesus' followers,
they're gathering every day in the temple courts,
and from house to house.

Now, in between those notices are two stories about Peter
and the other apostles healing people in the temple courts,
only to get arrested by the temple leaders,
followed each time by speech of Peter, claiming that Jesus is the true king of Israel,

and at the center of all this, is a story about Jesus's followers donating property and possessions to a common fund to help the poor,
which is really cool, but it seems kind of random for Luke to mention it here,
until you realize that this was a practice described in the laws of the Torah
and was supposed to be happening through the Jerusalem Temple and its leaders.

So, Luke's point here is clear.

The new temple of Jesus' community is fulfilling the purpose that God always intended for the Jerusalem Temple, to be a place where heaven and earth meet,
where people encounter God's generosity and healing presence.

And this conflict between the two temples that culminates in Acts chapter six and seven is the first wave of persecution. So Jesus' followers,
they continue to multiply, requiring more leaders,
and one of these, Stephen, is a bold witness for Jesus in Jerusalem,
and he ends up getting arrested,
and he's accused of speaking against and even threatening the temple,

and so Stephen here gives a long speech showing
how Israel's leaders have always rejected the messengers God sent them,
including Jesus, and now His disciples.

So the Jerusalem leaders are enraged, they murder Stephen, and they launched a wave of persecution
against Jesus' followers that drives most of them from the city.

But it has a paradoxical effect.

Luke shows how this tragedy actually became the means
by which Jesus' people are now sent out into Judea and Samaria.

Now in this section, Luke has collected a diverse group of story
that all show how the mostly Jewish, Jerusalem-based, community of Jesus
became a multi-ethnic international movement.

So first is the mission of Philip into Samaria.

It's the land of Israel's hated enemies, and many of them come to follow Jesus.

Next, we have the conversion of Saul of Tarsus, later known as Paul.
He was the sworn enemy and persecutor of Jesus' followers, until he personally met the risen Jesus,

and he then became a passionate advocate on behalf of Jesus.

Next is the story of Peter having a vision about how God doesn't consider
non-Jewish people ritually impure or unworthy of joining Jesus' family.

And so Peter, he's led by the Spirit into the house of a Roman soldier, full of non-Jewish people,
and they all respond to the good news about Jesus.

In fact, the Spirit shows up powerfully upon them just as He did to the Jewish disciples back in chapter 2.

These themes all come together in the founding of the church in Antioch,
the largest, most cosmopolitan city in that part of the Roman Empire.

And Luke, he tells us that Barnabas, a Jewish leader from the Jerusalem church,
went along with Paul to help lead this church community.

And so it, became the first large multi-ethnic church in history.

It was where Jesus' followers were called Christians for the first time.
And it's from here that the first international missionaries were sent out.

And so we see Jesus' Commission coming true, and this takes us into the rest of Luke's story

but for now, that's the first half of the book of Acts.

